Jyotishya or Astrology is a limb of the Vedas, literally the 'eye of Vedas.'

There are six branches of astrology: Gola, astronomy; Ganita, calculations based on planetary position; Jataka, birth horoscope; Prasna, answering specific questions; Muhurta, choosing a time to start something; and Nimitta, omens.

Astrology is essentially a language, a mystical cryptogram created by Sri Krsna. Each of the planets according to Srila Parasara Muni, father of Vyasadeva, is intimately connected with one of Krsna's avataras and ultimately is a manifestation of that particular avatara. As any language has parts such as nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, etc., astrology is no different except that in this language the parts are planets, signs, houses, aspects, etc. It is the language of time.

The horoscope and the zodiac belt are often referred to in the literature as the kala cakra, wheel of time. The horoscope is like a big clock, except that while we are familiar with clocks that have three hands, the horoscopic clock has ten hands made up of the Ascendent, Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu, and Ketu. And while the clocks of normal experience measure in hours, minutes, and seconds; the hands of the kala cakra measure much longer spans of time. A complete cycle of the ten hands from the Lagna (ascendent) to Ketu take respectively: one day, one year, 27 days, two years, one year, 12 years, one year, 30 years, 18 years, and 18 years. A complex clock indeed - one only Sri Krsna could create.

To create a horoscope requires the exact date, time and place of birth. The reverse is also true; given a chart, a learned astrologer can tell the date, time, and place of birth. This time-keeping feature of astrology is used today in archeology and history to date personalities and events based on recorded horoscopes or other astronomical observations such as eclipses and comets.

We have introduced two analogous systems with reference to astrology: astrology as language, and astrology as a super clock. We have done this to illustrate the neutrality or non-causal nature of astrology. Just as a language can be used for good or bad; to create edifying literature such as the Srimad Bhagavatam or a mundane novel with zero spiritual merit. In the same way, astrology can describe any phenomena that exists, whether it be divine, such as Sri Krsna or the life of an insignificant entity like me. The the planets do not cause the events that take place in a person's life but they are capable of describing, measuring and timing them. This is possible only because of the Lord's supreme will.

Another way to look at astrology is as a sophisticated and systematic science of laksanas; that is, symptoms or signs. There are numerous examples from the sastra where omens and physiognomy are used in relation to Sri Krsna. The science of omens or nimitta is directly a branch of astrology. The study of physiognomy or bodily symptoms (laksana) is called Samudrika Sastra, after Samudraraj, the lord of the sea, who, from his vantage point, was able to study the perfect bodily construction of Sri-Sri Laksmi Narayana. Hasta Samudrika, the science of palmistry, is a specialized sub-branch of Samudrika Sastra. It should be remembered that astrology, palmistry, and physiognomy are all intimately related.

Astrology and related subjects are valid sciences applicable to both the divine and mundane sphere because they are non-causal, rather they are symptomatic of higher laws.